Add Guides 2.0 (#90)
hanami/guides: content/v2.0/router/overview.md

---
title: "Router: Overview"
order: 10
---

# Overview

Hanami applications use [Hanami::Router](https://github.com/hanami/router) for routing: a Rack compatible, lightweight and fast HTTP router for Ruby.

## The first route

With your favorite editor open `/config/routes.rb` and add the following line inside of the `main` slice block.

```ruby
get '/hello', to: ->(env) { [200, {}, ['Hello from Hanami!']] }
```

So the whole file would look like this:

```ruby
# /config/routes.rb

Hanami.application.routes do

>   slice :main, at: "/" do

Reviewer: Should we explain how slice routing works here too, at least briefly? There will be more guides about slices, of course, but this will be a new concept to almost everyone so briefly mentioning it's something new to learn could be useful (though the routing portion here is almost trivial and obvious).

Author: This is also a topic I briefly mentioned in the `basic_usage` - Let's discuss if it's better to put it here when I'll push remaining docs :). I've not a strong opinion about it yet.

    root to: "home.show"

    get '/hello', to: ->(env) { [200, {}, ['Hello from Hanami']] }
  end
end
```

> Then start the server with `puma config.ru` and visit [http://localhost:3000/hello](http://localhost:2300/hello).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then start the server with `bundle exec rackup` and visit [http://localhost:3000/hello](http://localhost:2300/hello).
```

I'm not sure but I think this will do the same thing when you have puma configured, and run whatever other server you have configured if you don't.

Author: I believe this will be changed to sth like `hanami start` relatively soon. The CLI is not yet done, but I don't expect these guides to be finished earlier. @cllns what do you think?

Reviewer: Yea that makes sense. Can we come up with some kind of tag to make sure we go through and update these? `<!-- FIXME: Change to `bundle exec hanami server` when it's ready -->`
Though in this case, we know exactly what the command will be, so maybe we should just write it in here, even though it doesn't work yet.

You should see `Hello from Hanami!` in your browser.

> <p><img src="/v2.0/router/hello-from-hanami.png" alt="Hanami welcome page" class="img-responsive"></p>

Reviewer: I don't think this screenshot is particularly worth including here. It's just rendering plain-text so there's no visual elements. The browser chrome will inevitably be different throughout the guides, with different contributors using their own so minimizing then number of times we show browser screenshots is worth doing, I think :)

Author: I see it as a placeholder for now. The 1.3 Hanami new app had a pre-styled generated home page, which was actually worth being presented on the screenshot. I'd rather suggest changing it later to the default, instead of completely removing it.

Reviewer: Agree it's useful for the Getting Started guide, but this is just a simple lambda endpoint. 

Even with [the pre-styled default page that we have in the existing Getting Started guide](https://guides.hanamirb.org/v1.3/introduction/welcome-page.png) implemented, this simple lambda endpoint will never render a view or a template, it's just returning text.

Author: Yeah, agree:)

Let's explain what we just did.

> We created a **route**; an application can have many routes. By doing this, we told our app, to handle HTTP `get` request under the path: `/hello`, and handle it by calling a `Proc` object, that returns the status: `200`, empty headers, and the `'Hello from Hanami'` body. This response is given back to the browser for rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We created a **route**; an application can have many routes. By doing this, we told our app to handle HTTP `get` request under the path `/hello`, and handle it by calling a lambda that returns the status code `200` (a success), with empty headers, and the `'Hello from Hanami'` body. This response is given back to the browser for rendering.
```
A lambda is an instance of `Proc`, but they behave differently. Since Hanami::Router is agnostic about which it received (I assume 😇 ), I think saying that it's a `Proc` might make people think it wants non-lambda Procs

Author: Lol. Didn't know! :D Thanks! By writing these docs I'll learn more advanced Ruby's tips, than in a year of regular development ;).

Each route starts with an [HTTP verb](http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec9.html) declaration, `get` in our case.

> Then we specify a relative URI (`/hello` for us) and the object that is responsible to respond to incoming requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we specify a relative URI (`/hello` for us) and the object that is responsible for responding to requests.
```

Author: Hmm... I'll process all docs through Grammarly first, before giving them to review ;).

> **That is pretty neat!**

Reviewer: It is neat! (And I like this style of interjecting some enthusiasm 🙂

> The only requirement for our routes to be handled properly, is to pass an object as a handler, that responds to: `call` method, accepting one argument, and returning the expected response object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only requirement for our routes to be handled properly is for the object that handles the request to implement a `call` method that accepts one argument (the Rack `env`), and that it returns the expected response format.
```

### Also
I'm not sure if we should get into the Rack expected response format here (the Array with size 3 with status code as Int, Headers as `Hash` and Body as Array (of Strings)).

The reason I'm not sure is that full-stack Hanami apps will call instances of `Hanami::Action` most of the time. They do this too, but indirectly.

Author: My idea was to allow a user to type sth from scratch, without initializing Magic objects, that works out of the box. This is a very minimal setup, very easy to understand and to present the core of the behavior.

I'm moving towards actions in the `basic_usage` section. Soon I should push the remaining two files (`basic_usage` and `advanced_usage`) for the router, then we'll have a better overview, of how to reorder the content.

> Here are two different implementations of the same thing, check it out!

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this example is worth including. I get the point, but we don't want to encourage people using class methods like this :D 

Maybe instead, this can be an example of integrating with a `Hanami::Action`? And mixing a lambda with a Hanami action in the same set of routes?

Author: Yeah, I actually agree. But can we use Hanami::Action without rendering the view? - Just passing the returned value? If I remember, it's by setting the `self.body` ?

Reviewer: Yup! `response.body =` though, instead of `self.body =` (since the action is frozen)

Each route starts with an [HTTP verb](http://www.w3.org/Protocols/rfc2616/rfc2616-sec9.html) declaration, `get` in our case.
Then we specify a relative URI (`/hello` for us) and the object that is responsible to respond to incoming requests.

**That is pretty neat!**

The only requirement for our routes to be handled properly is to pass an object as a handler, that responds to: `call` method, accepting one argument, and returning the expected response object.

Here is another example of implementing the same thing. If you're interested in custom route handling, [check out advanced usage section](/v2.0/router/advanced-usage).

```ruby
# /config/routes.rb

Hanami.application.routes do
  slice :main, at: "/" do
    root to: "home.show"

    get "/hello", to: "home.index"
  end
end
```

```ruby
# slices/main/actions/home/index.rb

module Main
  module Actions
    module Home
      class Index < Main::Action
        def handle(req, res)

>           res.body = "<h1>Hello, Hanami!</h1>"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          res.body = "Hello, Hanami!"
```
This could be HTML but it could also be plaintext (or JSON, or XML, or anything). I don't see writing HTML here as being all that helpful, and I see it potentially being confusing (since the action doesn't care what it its body is, to some extent).
